File Name: 01_basic_queries.sql

Description:
This SQL script contains a structured set of foundational queries designed to explore and analyze football match data from a Premier League dataset. The script focuses on extracting meaningful insights using simple, well-organized SQL queries, serving as the starting point of the overall analysis project.

Objective:
The objective of this file is to introduce core SQL concepts through practical application on real-world football data. The queries aim to transform raw match data into clear and interpretable metrics, covering dataset structure, scoring behavior, match outcomes, and disciplinary patterns.

Topics Covered:
The queries in this file are organized into four main sections:

Dataset Overview:
Total matches, teams, and seasons
Average matches per season
Dataset time span (first and last match)
Goals & Scoring:
Total and average goals per match
Distribution of matches based on goal thresholds (0 goals, <3, =3, >3)
Match Outcomes:
Distribution of results (home wins, away wins, draws)
Percentage breakdown of match outcomes to evaluate home advantage
Discipline (Cards):
Average total, yellow, and red cards per match
Maximum number of cards recorded in a single match

SQL Concepts Used:
This file focuses on fundamental SQL operations, including:

SELECT
COUNT, SUM, AVG
DISTINCT
UNION / UNION ALL
GROUP BY
ORDER BY
LIMIT
CASE WHEN
Basic arithmetic operations on columns

Approach:
The script follows a structured and modular approach, dividing the analysis into clearly defined sections. Each section addresses a specific aspect of football data analysis, using simple and readable queries. The emphasis is on clarity, consistency, and logical progression rather than complex SQL techniques.

Results:
The outputs generated by these queries provide key insights into the dataset, including scoring trends, match outcome distributions, and disciplinary behavior. These results form the basis for further analysis and can be used for reporting, visualization, or comparison in later stages of the project.

Notes:
This file represents the first stage of the project and establishes a solid analytical foundation. It prioritizes simplicity, readability, and practical understanding, making it suitable for learning and demonstration purposes. Future steps of the project may extend this work with more advanced queries, deeper statistical analysis, and richer insights into football performance.